The Luxembourg Carbon Removal Leadership Act

Chapter 1: General Provisions 
Art 1. Object
Have ordered and order:
(1) This law contributes to:
the implementation of the amended 2020 Climate Law (Loi du 15 décembre 2020 relative au climat)
the implementation of integrated national energy and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 (PNEC)
the fulfillment of Luxembourg’s emissions reductions obligations under the Paris Agreement
establishing Luxembourg as a leading center for carbon removal finance, financial services, entrepreneurship and other commercial activities

(2) Chapter 2 establishes amendments to existing laws concerning climate change and emissions reductions that incorporate carbon removal as an 
eligible measure to meet the objectives set forth in such laws

(3) Chapter 3 establishes a state-administered program to procure carbon removal from carbon dioxide removal operators as a means to support Luxembourg’s 
net-zero targets, and the fulfillment of its obligations as a signatory to the Paris Agreement

(4) Chapter 4 establishes regulations supporting the growth of carbon dioxide removal financial services and other commercial activities in Luxembourg, 
and Luxembourg’s global position as a leading carbon dioxide removal financial and commercial center.

Art 2. Definitions

For the purposes of this law, we mean:

“Carbon dioxide removal”: the process of capturing and storing atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO₂) through natural or technological means, resulting in a measurable and verifiable reduction in the atmospheric concentration of CO₂.
“Carbon removal certification framework”, or (“certification framework”): Regulation adopted by the European Parliament and the Council in April 2024 to establish criteria and methodologies for certifying various types of carbon removals, including permanent storage, products, and carbon farming activities.
 “Carbon removal public procurement”: activities whereby the government purchases carbon removal services on a performance basis (CO2/tonne removed) from carbon removal operators through a competitive process in compliance with existing procurement laws and regulations. 
“Carbon removal technologies supporting renewable energy generation”: technologies that remove carbon dioxide (CO₂) from the atmosphere and simultaneously support the generation of renewable energies, as defined by the Minister of Environment, Climate and Biodiversity.
“Commission”: the European Commission;
“Emissions reduction unit” or “ERU”: a unit issued pursuant to Article 6 of the Protocol, and decisions adopted under the UNFCCC or the Protocol;
“ETS emissions”: the release into the atmosphere of greenhouse gases, from sources located in an installation, or the release, from an aircraft carrying 
out an aviation activity referred to in Annex I, of gases specified in relation to this activity;
“Greenhouse gas”: the gases listed in Annex II of Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October 2003 establishing a 
system for trading greenhouse gas emission allowances. greenhouse in the Union and amending Council Directive 96/61/EC , as amended by delegated act of the 
European Commission taken in accordance with Articles 22 and 23 of that Directive, and other gaseous components of the atmosphere, both natural and anthropogenic, which absorb and return infrared radiation;
“Installation”: a fixed technical unit where one or more of the activities indicated in Annex I take place as well as any other activity directly relating to it which is technically linked to the activities carried out on the site and which is likely to have impacts on emissions and pollution;
“Ministry”: the Ministry of the Environment, Climate and Biodiversity
“Net zero emissions”: the state in which any residual anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases are counterbalanced by equivalent anthropogenic absorptions;
“Operator”: any person who operates or controls an installation or any person to whom decisive economic power over the technical operation of the installation has been delegated;
“Paris Agreement”: Universal climate agreement as approved by the law of October 28, 2016 approving the Paris Agreement on climate change, adopted in Paris on December 12, 2015.
“Person”: any natural or legal person;
“Public”: one or more people as well as the associations, organizations or groups constituted by these people;
 “Regulatory sandbox” [from the Net Zero Industry Act May 2024]
"Sectoral Climate Targets":specific greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets set for different economic sectors or industries within Luxembourg.
“Tonne of carbon dioxide equivalent”: a metric ton of carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) or a quantity of any other greenhouse gas referred to in Annex II having an equivalent global warming potential;

Chapter 2: Establishing Carbon Dioxide Removal as an eligible measure in support of Luxembourg’s Net Zero Emissions Targets.

Art. 3. 
In Article 2 of the Amended Climate Law of 29 May 2024, Point 31 is inserted, worded as follows: “'carbon removal”: the process of capturing and storing atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO₂) through natural or technological means, resulting in a measurable and verifiable reduction in the atmospheric concentration of CO₂."

Art. 4.
In Article 4 of the same law, the following modifications are made
Paragraph 4 is inserted, worded as follows: "The national climate strategy shall incorporate durable carbon removal and storage as a component, promoting projects and technologies that achieve certified carbon removal."

Art. 5.
In article 13 of the same law, the following modifications are made
Paragraph (3) Point 1 shall be modified, worded as follows: “national measures that are implemented to combat climate change, and to promote renewable energies and carbon removal”

Art. 6. 
In article 14 of the same law, the following modifications are made

Paragraph 1, Point 1 shall be modified, worded as follows: “projects, programs, activities, reports and other measures aimed at reducing emissions or removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.”
Paragraph 1, Point 5 shall be modified, worded as follows: “financing of renewable energy, energy efficiency and carbon removal projects in developing countries and Luxembourg.

Chapter 3: Establishing a Carbon Removal Procurement Program

Art. Program administration and purpose

A state-administered carbon removal procurement program is created, hereinafter called the “program”.
The program shall be implemented and administered by the Ministry of the Environment, Climate and Biodiversity, hereinafter called the “Ministry”.
The purpose of the program is to:

Contribute to the successful achievement of Luxembourg’s net zero emissions targets, in the form of carbon dioxide removal activities; 
Create demand for carbon dioxide removal through direct public procurement of carbon dioxide removal units from eligible operators operating carbon dioxide removal installations both within Luxembourg, and outside of Luxembourg;
Promote the accelerated growth and cost reduction of a range of carbon dioxide removal forms;
Promote carbon dioxide financing and investment, other commercial and research activities, and mobilize related areas of sector expertise and capacities, in the interest of supporting the growth, diversification and sustainable priorities and strategies of Luxembourg’s financial and financial services sector, thereby establishing Luxembourg as a leading global center for carbon dioxide removal finance and commercial activities. 

Art. Exemption from Article 46 of the amended law of April 8, 2018

The forty percent limit provided for in Article 46, last paragraph of the amended law of April 8, 2018 on public procurement, does not apply to the fund's interventions.

Art. Carbon Removal Procurement framework and regulations

The Program will be implemented in compliance with Arts. 17 and 18, Chapter 2 of the Law of April 8, 2018 on public procurement concerning competitive procedures for public procurement.

In compliance with Art. 16, paragraph b) of the same law, due to the highly important and special nature of carbon removal as a component of Luxembourg’s emissions reductions goals, contracts for carbon removal services between the Ministry and operators shall be extended to a maximum term of 10 years.

Carbon removal procurement contracts will be awarded to operators on a cost-competitive basis. 

Additional special factors shall be factored in the proposal evaluation and selection process that pertain to measurable or verifiable project characteristics, functions and outcomes that support environmental, social or economic objectives and prerogatives of the state, 

Cost-Sharing: contract payment terms (euro/CO2 tonne removed) will be determined in part based on projected revenues from non-state sources. The higher the external funding secured, the lower the payment levels will be.  

Art. Eligible carbon dioxide removal activities

[“Permanent Removals” only In CRCF?]
Operator eligibility criteria will derive from criteria formulated by the Ministry, in alignment with the Carbon Removal Certification Framework 
Carbon removal installations awarded procurement contracts may be located anywhere in the world. 

Art. Annual carbon removal procurement volumes

The Ministry shall establish carbon removal volumes to be procured through the program based on shortfalls between emissions reductions targets established in the 2020 Climate Law, and actual emissions reductions realized in the prior year, as well as projected emissions shortfalls in the current year.
A Climate Observatory shall be responsible for analyzing and reporting emissions shortfalls and will make recommendations to the Ministry concerning carbon removal procurement volumes

Art. Procurement program funding

Funding Allocation: The state will allocate funding to support carbon dioxide removal projects through the direct procurement of carbon dioxide removal services on an annual basis. The program will be authorized from 2025 to 2045, with funding increasing each year.
[Funded by the luxembourg climate fund]
[How much?] 

Art. Procurement program application 
Application guidelines will be published in advance by the Minister.

[ANNEX]

Art. Operator Procurement Contracts

3. Performance-Based Contracts: Financial aid will be transferred annually upon verified completion of carbon dioxide removal services, based on €/CO2 tonnes removed. Contracts shall not exceed ten years in length.

4. Cost-Sharing: Aid levels will be determined based on projected revenues from non-state sources. The higher the external funding secured, the lower the level of state aid granted.

5. Competitive Selection: State aid will be awarded to operators on a cost-competitive basis. Application guidelines will be published in advance.

6. Price Modifiers: A multifactor selection criteria will be established to attribute value to a range of project characteristics beyond cost. Modifiers include:

7. Eligibility Criteria: Eligibility will be based on clear and transparent standards related to quality, performance, and outcomes, and will be technology-neutral. Standards include cost and maximum fiscal impact, public safety, monitoring, reporting and evaluation, life cycle analysis, and legal compliance.

8. [Reasonable return on investment]

Section:  Application Procedures

1. Application Requirements: Operators must submit a completed application by a predetermined date, including business information, technical project descriptions, audited reports, notarized contracts, cash flow analysis, proof of insurance, and bid price for services.

Section: Reporting and Evaluation

1. Annual Reports: Operators must submit annual reports documenting the completion of services and any project amendments. Non-compliance may result in penalties, withheld payment, or contract suspension.
